@DATABASE 0015
@(C) "Copyright © 1992-1997 Cloanto Italia srl"
@REM Cloanto Personal Paint 7 CD-ROM
@FONT topaz.font 8
@WIDTH 74

@NODE Main "Personal Paint 7 - 10. Other Utilities"
@TOC PPaintCD:H/7/0/4/OO00/Main

@{B}10.        Other Utilities@{UB}

Personal Paint comes with different utility programs and data files
designed to work in the same environment in which the main program is
used. This chapter describes some utilities stored in the "PPaint_Tools"
drawer of the program disk.


@{B}10.1       AskAssign@{UB}

As explained in section @{"1.11" LINK PPaintCD:H/7/0/4/0002/Main 1074} ("Environment Variables and Standard
Drawers") it may sometimes be necessary to use the AmigaDOS Assign command
to assign logical names. The AskAssign program, which comes with the
Personal Paint package, can also be accessed with the mouse from the
Workbench environment, rather than the Amiga Shell or CLI. AskAssign is
also used by the InstallPPaint procedure.

Section @{"1.13.1" LINK PPaintCD:H/7/0/4/0002/Main 1310} ("Automatic Installation: The InstallPPaint Program")
explains how to create drawers and select the directory (or volume) to
which a logical name is to be assigned. When called by InstallPPaint,
AskAssign is used to specify the position where the Personal Paint
environment is to be installed. If AskAssign is executed as a stand-alone
program (by double-clicking its Workbench icon with the mouse), an Amiga
logical device name (like "PPaint" or "FONTS") may be assigned. The
logical device name can be modified by editing the ASKNAME field in the
Tool Types string gadget of the Workbench Information window. To do this,
the Workbench Information menu must be selected while the AskAssign icon
is highlighted (i.e. after a mouse selection). The texts displayed in the
file requester may be modified by editing the other fields which can be
displayed in the Tool Types string gadget. By default, the version of
AskAssign which comes with Personal Paint is configured to assign the
"FONTS" logical device name, if executed from the Workbench.


@{B}10.2       ColorText@{UB}

As explained in section @{"3.1.3.2" LINK PPaintCD:H/7/0/4/0017/Main 398}, Personal Paint supports text editing
using color fonts. Some multi-color fonts are also enclosed with the
program. Amiga operating systems starting from version 2.0 support colored
fonts directly. On previous versions, the ColorText utility must be used
in order to integrate color font handling capabilities into the system
software. ColorText was developed by Inter/Active Softworks, the creators
of the original ColorFont format.

On operating systems previous to version 2.0, ColorText can be enabled
with a double-click on its workbench icon. Starting from version 2.0,
there is no need to use ColorText to use color fonts.


@{B}10.3       HP DeskJet Drivers@{UB}

New HP DeskJet drivers (result of the joint development efforts of Cloanto
and Commodore), are included on the program disk. These are the first
versions of the drivers without the famous RLE compression bug. The 550C
driver uses black ink in addition to cyan, magenta and yellow, and is not
bound by the previous 10 inch size-limit. It also features improved cyan
balancing code, compared to drivers previously released by Commodore.

The DeskJet drivers use the Threshold value to activate a driver-local
correction table. Using Personal Paint's 24-bit printing with these
DeskJet drivers, Threshold should remain set to 1 (= no correction), and
Density values of 4, 5 or 6 (which activate depletion combined with
different levels of shingling) are generally not required. A value of 7
only activates shingling, which improves print quality.

Several users have asked whether the enhanced HP DeskJet drivers supplied
with Personal Paint support 600×300 dpi graphics output. It appears that
some owners of DeskJet 560C and DeskJet 520 were misled by incomplete
information. The advertised "600×300" printing capabilities of these
models are mainly a result of RET (Resolution Enhancement Technology)
applied to the 300×300 dpi print data. The printers cannot produce 600×300
dpi color graphics, and there is no documented command to send black &
white graphics to the printer in 600×300 dpi.


@{B}10.4       Fonts@{UB}

Personal Paint comes with several color fonts and a font named
"Personal.font". All fonts can be installed by the installation
procedures.

Personal Paint and the Personal Fonts Maker Color Extensions normally
share the same Personal font for their user interface. The font itself has
been upgraded a few times. On a system where different versions of these
programs are installed, it may happen that one of the programs expects an
older version of the font to be available. While minor changes are usually
backwards compatible, if any characters appear to be incorrectly displayed
it is sufficient to remove the font from the system FONTS: directory. All
versions of Personal Paint and PFM2 also search for the font in their
local directories, where the font is copied during automatic
installation.

If Topaz 8 is used for the Workbench icon texts, Personal 8 should be
considered as a more readable replacement.

@ENDNODE
